
Docker Container
Containers are multiple isolated services that are run on a single control host (underlying infrastructure) and they access a single kernel.

Key Benefits

Improved performance

portability

eliminates environmental inconsistencies

Docker is a tool that uses open source Container technology intended to make the process of creating, deploying and running applications easier by using container based virtualization technology.

Docker Components
Docker components include

Docker daemon : Docker process responsible for managing docker objects

Docker client : Communicates with Docker daemon through API calls

Docker Image - Read only template that stores the application and environment.

Docker Container - Runtime instance of a docker image

Docker File - Automates Image construction

Docker registry - Public and private repositories to store images

Docker End-to-End Workflow
Let us quickly look into the steps involved in the docker flow.

Create a Dockerfile

Build a Docker Image

Verify Image

Push to Registry

Pull from Registry

Run Image

Verify running Container/ServiceMore on Docker
In this course we will continue to learn more about Docker. Following are the aspects of Docker that will be covered.

Docker Networking

Docker Storage

Docker Compose tool

Docker Security

Best Practices
The concept of networking in Docker comes into picture when working with Docker in a real time scenario at a large scale.

Docker Networking helps us to share data across various containers.

Host and containers in Docker are tied with 1:N relationship, which means one host can command multiple containers.
Container Networking Model
Container networking model is a standard defined for configuring network interfaces in Linux containers. This was proposed by Docker and later adopted by libnetwork (defines networking for docker) project.

In this model, a set of network interfaces is assembled together to formalize the steps that are required to provide networking for containers.

The fundamental goal of this model is to achieve application portability across various infrastructures.

This model not only provides application portability but also utilizes the advantages of special features and capabilities of the infrastructure.

Container Networking Model (CNM)
Container Networking Model (CNM)
This block diagram represents the Container networking model.

Containers are interconnected to each other through a network established by connecting the ethernet port of the individual containers to the host system.

Every host system has a network infrastructure built in with a network driver and IPAM driver.

Network driver - Device that enables network communication.

IPAM Driver - Provides IP address management serives.

CNM core components include

Sandbox

Endpoint

Network

CNM - Components
Sandbox
Includes container's network stack configuration

Manages container's interfaces, routing table and DNS settings

Includes multiple endpoints from multiple networks

Endpoint
Connects Sandbox to Network

Abstracts Network connection from the application

Provides portability to connect to different Network drivers

Network
Collection of endpoints that can be connected to each other

Implementation can be a Linux bridge, VLAN etc.

Docker Networking
Refer to the image to understand how docker network is configured on a host machine
Behind the screens
Docker Networking
Every regular host machine (laptops/ Vm / Cloud machine) has an ethernet interface with an IP attached (eg. ip address 10.0.1.1).

Once you install docker , within the host machine, Docker creates a bridge.

Docker installs scripts that are clever enough to interpret the networking on the host and identify a space for its ip configuration.

When you start a container, it creates a virtual bridge called docker01.

Default inet address for Docker 172.17.42.1.

Docker Native Network Drivers
Docker engine had in-built network drivers which are the core component that enables networking in containers.

Below are the different types of network drivers that can be used to configure networking in docker.

Host: Uses host's networking stack.

Bridge: Creates a Linux Bridge on the host which is managed by Docker.

Overlay: Creates an overlay network for multi-host networks.

MACVLAN: Uses MACVLAN brige to connect container interfaces with parent host interface.

None: Container has its own networking stack and completely isolated from the host network.

Network Modes
Various modes for networking is all about how we manage connections between containers using the ​network drivers.

Bridge mode Networking: The default network will be bridge network.
Unless we specify the network option in docker run command, Docker daemon connects the container to this network.

Host Mode Networking: Add the container to the network stack of the host. Container in this mode will not create a new network configuration, where as share the network config of host.
--net = host

Container Mode Networking: New container created will have the same config as that of the specified Container.
--net=container:$comtainer2

No Networking: Adds container to container network stack. Hence this lacks connectivity with the host.
--net=none

Network Drivers & Scope
Network Drivers & Scope
On Docker installation, there are 3 networks that are automatically created.

This can be listed using command

docker network ls
You may try this on Katacoda Playground.

Bridge Network
Bridge Network
This default network is available in all docker hosts. While creating containers, by default they get mapped to this bridge if you do not specify a different one.

Lets run docker inspect command to know more on this network.

docker network inspect bridge
This command lists

Details on the configured bridge network

Containers running in the network

1 of 15Bridge Network (Contd1...)
Lets create couple of containers using below command. Click here to try this out in Katacoda Docker playground.

docker run -itd --name=container1 busybox
docker run -itd --name=container2 busybox
Now we have 2 containers running in the default bridge network.

Lets run docker inspect command.

docker network inspect bridge
Now we can see these containers listed under this bridge network.

Bridge Network (Contd 2...)
Disconnect from the bridge network

docker network disconnect bridge container1
User Defined Network
Users can create 2 kinds of network

Bridge network

Overlay network

Docker command to create a Bridge network

docker network create <<network name>> 
e.g. docker network create  myNetwork
Create a User Defined Network
Lets create our new bridge network and learn how to connect containers to the network.

Step 1:

docker network create -d bridge new_bridge
-d --> to specify the driver type (in this case its is bridge network)

Step 2:

Verify if the new network is created

docker network ls
This command will list the new bridge along with the other default bridges.

Run the below command to inspect the new network created.

docker network inspect new_bridge
Create a User Defined Network (Contd 1...)
Step 3:

Add container to the network

Lets create a new container using image training/postgres to run a PostgreSQL db and tag this to the new network created.

docker run -d --net=new_bridge --name db training/postgres
Step 4: Verify if its connected to the new network.

Run the below command to get the network details on where this container is connected.

docker inspect --format='{{json .NetworkSettings.Networks}}'  db
Create a User Defined Network (Contd 2...)
Step 5:

Lets run the python web app using image training/webapp without specifying any network settings.

This connects the container to the default bridge network.

docker run -d --name web training/webapp python app.py
Step 6:

Verify if the web app container is connected to the default bridge network.

docker inspect --format='{{range .NetworkSettings.Networks}}{{.IPAddress}}{{end}}' web
Create a User Defined Network (Contd 4...)
Step 7:

Check Connectivity between containers.

Lets try to ping the web app container from the db container using the below command.

docker exec -it db bash
Now lets enter the ping command in the db running container.

ping 172.17.0.2
Note: ip address should be as that of the web app container. Refer to Step 6 to get the ip address.

Press CTRL-C to end this ping and you will find that the ping command failed. This is because the web app and the db container is not connected to the same network.

Create a User Defined Network (Contd 5...)
Step 8:

Connect web container to new_bridge.

You can open an additional terminal in Katacoda playground. Let's execute the below commands in this new terminal.

Let's now connect web container new_bridge network.


docker network connect new_bridge web

Step 9:

Repeat Step 7 commands to ping web container from db container. Get the ipaddress by running below command again. This time you will find 2 ipaddress, the second one is for the connectivity with the new_bridge.


docker inspect --format='{{json .NetworkSettings.Networks.new_bridge}}'  web

This ping command is successful now since we have established connectivity between 2 containers.

Network Commands
Click here to try this out in Katacoda Docker playground.

Create Network
Command to create new bridge network.

docker network create <<network name>>
e.g docker network create myNetwork

Connect Container to Network
docker network connect <<network name>> <<Container name>>
e.g. Create a container busybox and connect this to myNetwork.

docker run -itd --name=container1 busybox
docker network connect myNetwork container1

Network Commands (Contd 1...)
List all Networks
docker network ls
Inspect a Network
We can inspect a network to list the configuration and containers connected to using command

docker network inspect <<network name>>
e.g.

docker network inspect myNetwork
Disconnect a container from a Network
docker network disconnect <<network name>> <<container name>>
e.g.

docker network disconnect isolated_nw container5
Network Commands (Contd 2...)
Remove network
Command to remove unused network

docker network rm <<network name>>
e.g. docker network rm MynetwoTry Networking in Docker
Create a new bridge 'bridge_sample'.

Run a couple of images (Cont1 and Cont2) and connect these to the new bridge created. Now try to ping from cont1 to cont2 to verify connectivity.

Once done, stop containers and then remove network, containers, and images using docker commands.

rk


pause       Pause all processes within one or more containers
  port        List port mappings or a specific mapping for the container
  ps          List containers
  pull        Pull an image or a repository from a registry
  push        Push an image or a repository to a registry
  rename      Rename a container
  restart     Restart one or more containers
  rm          Remove one or more containers
  rmi         Remove one or more images
  run         Run a command in a new container
  save        Save one or more images to a tar archive (streamed to STDOUT by default)
  search      Search the Docker Hub for images
  start       Start one or more stopped containers
  stats       Display a live stream of container(s) resource usage statistics
  stop        Stop one or more running containers
  tag         Create a tag TARGET_IMAGE that refers to SOURCE_IMAGE
  top         Display the running processes of a container
  unpause     Unpause all processes within one or more containers
  update      Update configuration of one or more containers
  version     Show the Docker version information
  wait        Block until one or more containers stop, then print their exit codes


Multi-Host Networking
Docker Engine provides out-of-the-box support to multi-host networking using overlay network driver.

A bridge network is used when we run a relatively small network on a single host.

An overlay network is used when we have a significantly larger network involving multiple host.

Multi-Host Networking
Docker Engine provides out-of-the-box support to multi-host networking using overlay network driver.

A bridge network is used when we run a relatively small network on a single host.

An overlay network is used when we have a significantly larger network involving multiple host
Overlay Network
There are 2 ways of creating an overlay network.

Overlay networking with an external key-value store

Overlay networking in swarm mode
Overlay networking with an external key-value store
We need a valid key-value store service to create a Overlay network.

Before creating a network in this way, you must install and configure your chosen key-value store service.

Pre-requisites:

A key-value store (Docker supports Consul, Etcd, and ZooKeeper)

A cluster of hosts that connects to key-value store

Host with Docker Engine configured properly

Host within cluster must have a unique hostname because key-value store uses host name to identify cluster members

Overlay networks in swarm mode
What is Swarm?

A swarm is a cluster of Docker engines, or nodes, where you deploy services.

The cluster management and orchestration features embedded in the Docker Engine are built using SwarmKit.

Docker engines participating in a cluster are running in swarm mode.

Source: docker.com

You can initialize a swarm or join an already existing swarm.
Overlay Network in Swarm Mode
The swarm nodes exchange overlay network information using a gossip protocol.

By default the nodes encrypt and authenticate information they exchange via gossip using the AES algorithm in GCM mode.

Manager nodes in the swarm rotate the key used to encrypt gossip data every 12 hours.
